Justin Peabody

Researched Argument Essay

UCWR 110

4/25/2025

Across all forms of mass media, a dire message frequently appears: global temperatures are rising, largely due to increases in greenhouse gas emission rates. In response to this, many local, state and national governments have enacted emission reduction policies. One such policy is a carbon tax. The website earth.org defines a carbon tax as "a government-imposed pricing mechanism that places a fee on GHG emissions from burning planet-warming fuels including oil, gas, and coal ... measured per ton of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions released \[that\] needs to be paid for by the burning entity" (Omolere 2024). Carbon taxes require businesses to compensate the government for operations that release greenhouse gases. This is done to monetarily incentivize industries to adopt carbon-efficient technologies and operational methods. Carbon tax revenue can be used by the government to invest in such technologies and methods, fund environmental restoration efforts, establish cuts in income and property taxes, and more. However, carbon tax policies have shortcomings. They can place an excessive financial burden on lower and middle class taxpayers. In addition, other policies have yielded greater emission reductions than carbon taxes. Federal carbon tax policies, which have been adopted by European nations since the 1990s, have received both praise and pushback for these reasons. The United States has several state level carbon policies but no federal carbon policy. All arguments considered, a federal carbon tax should be implemented in the United States as a mitigative policy to address climate change because well-designed carbon tax policies can be economically impartial, compensate for potential limitations in other decarbonization plans, and facilitate the future adoption of other policies.

Carbon taxes should be federally implemented in the United States because they can be designed in an economically just fashion. Many people believe carbon taxes are regressive --- meaning people of different economic classes are affected disproportionately --- and are thus inequitable. Indeed, a carbon tax would likely present greater financial difficulty for people who spend a larger portion of their income on goods encompassed by the tax, many of whom are lower and middle class citizens (Omolere 2024). However, not all carbon tax policies are regressive. Julius Andersson, an assistant professor of economics at Stockholm Institute of Transition Economics, in collaboration with Giles Atkinson, a professor of environmental policy at London School of Economics, statistically analyzed the effects of Sweden's income inequality on the degree of regressivity of the Swedish carbon tax since its implementation in 1991. Andersson and Atkinson found that a strong, positive, linear correlation exists between carbon tax regressivity and income inequality in Sweden --- the higher the nation's wealth gap, the more regressive its carbon tax policy became. Andersson believes his discovery falsifies the generalization that all carbon taxes are regressive. "It is a common finding in the economics literature that carbon taxes are, or would be, regressive ... However, most of the earlier literature is based on US data, and the US is unrepresentative of an average high-income country in terms of variables that are arguably important for carbon tax incidence" (Andersson 2021). Andersson argues that most people who believe carbon taxes are regressive make this judgement based on US carbon tax policies, which tend to be regressive because the US has high levels of income inequality. The article "Nine Charts about Wealth Inequality in America" quantifies this wealth gap --- on average, the wealthiest families in the United States had 71 times the income of middle class families in 2022 ("Nine Charts"). In European countries with lower income inequality, Andersson found carbon tax policies to be more proportional to citizens' income. This insight begs the question of how carbon taxes can be made economically fairer in countries possessing higher wealth gaps, such as the US. The paper "French attitudes on climate change, carbon taxation and other climate policies," written by economists Thomas Douenne and Adrien Fabre, sheds light on this question. The paper details a survey which solicited the opinions of 3002 French citizens on a carbon tax policy known as a "tax and dividend", in which a portion of government carbon tax revenue is evenly redistributed to taxpayers (Douenne, Fabre, 2020). In their survey, Douenne and Fabre asked citizens which groups of people they believed would experience financial benefit and hardship under the proposed policy. The majority of survey respondents expressed the opinion that the proposed policy would be regressive: the largest portion of respondents (30%) believed the richest citizens would benefit from the policy while only 2% believed the richest would be financially impaired. More strikingly, 58% believed the middle class would experience financial harm from the policy while only 5% believed the middle class would benefit. These statistics suggest that, even in countries with low income inequality such as France, citizens believe a carbon tax policy would be regressive despite Andersson's argument to the contrary. These conflicting insights beg the question of whether the opinions of the survey respondents or Andersson's statistical analyses are more trustworthy. In a paper titled "Can We Reconcile French People with the Carbon Tax? Disentangling Beliefs from Preferences," a companion paper to "French attitudes on climate change, carbon taxation and other climate policies," Douenne and Fabre argue that people's perceptions of carbon tax regressivity are heavily biased because they often originate from a US-centric view on carbon taxes, in contrast to the more globally encompassing estimates of Andersson and other economists. Based on this, Douenne and Fabre argue that people's opinions of carbon taxes are unreliable. This paper provides a bar graph showing that French citizens in the bottom 10% of France's income range would have the highest net wealth gains under a tax and dividend policy, and these gains decrease as income decile increases (Douenne, Fabre, 2019). This suggests that, while some carbon tax policies are regressive, tax and dividend policies can improve equality because they involve uniform redistribution of government revenue to taxpayers. As a nation with a relatively high wealth gap, the US would especially benefit from a policy that returns some of its revenue to less affluent citizens.

In addition to flexibility of revenue use, carbon taxes would be an effective policy in the United States because they have important advantages over other policies which price greenhouse gas emissions. One such policy is called an emission trading scheme, also known as a cap-and-trade mechanism. In the article "What is the difference between carbon taxes and emissions trading schemes?" financial risk analyst Dimitrova Monna explains, "A carbon tax ... incentivizes businesses to reduce their carbon footprint by attaching a financial cost to emissions, but fixes no boundaries on the total amount of CO2 emitted by the economy. On the other hand, cap-and-trade mechanisms ... also impose a strict limit on emissions by controlling the overall carbon budget available for industries" (Dimitrova 2024). Stricter limitations have allowed emissions trading policies to yield much greater emission reductions and greater financial compensation of emissions than carbon taxes. This is a major reason many people believe cap and trade mechanisms are more effective than carbon taxes. The statistics validate this opinion: altogether, carbon taxes and emissions trading systems compensate for 23% of global carbon dioxide emissions. However, emissions trading systems financially account for 18% of emissions while carbon taxes only account for 5% (Dimitrova 2024). Since a carbon tax imposes no limits on emissions, wealthier individuals and businesses often do not change their emission rates as long as they can financially compensate for their actions. Despite this shortcoming, Dimitrova acknowledges several merits of carbon taxes over emissions trading policies. "[A carbon tax is easy and fast to implement. It is straightforward and can be understood by a lot of economic representatives and actors. It does not mobilize a lot of administrative frameworks and resources - its introduction can be a matter of months. Also, every individual country can decide itself on the levels and scopes of its carbon taxes" (Dimitrova 2024). Dimitrova suggests that emissions trading schemes correct the uncertainty in emission reductions that come with carbon taxes, while carbon taxes account for the time intensive nature and rigidity of emissions trading schemes. Therefore, decarbonization plans should include both carbon taxes and emissions trading schemes, with carbon taxes pricing emissions and emissions trading schemes limiting the carbon budgets of industries and businesses. Dimitrova agrees, stating, "The economic theory states that the two systems can even be complementary" (Dimitrova 2024). However, one may still doubt the economic feasibility of this combination of policies in the United States. For communities that rely heavily on the burning of fossil fuels, of which there are many in the US, placing an upper threshold on emissions may temporarily derail these communities' economies due to their reliance on carbon emissions to produce essential goods. In such communities, a carbon tax would be a more effective short-term solution. Even if the tax fails to alter businesses' emission patterns, it would provide the federal government with revenue to invest in energy-efficient technology. Such technology would allow businesses to more easily adhere to the emission caps set by subsequent emissions trading schemes, bolstering the schemes' effectiveness. In light of this, carbon taxes and emissions trading schemes should not be implemented simultaneously in the United States. Carbon taxes are best implemented first, as an initial, temporary policy that facilitates the future implementation of policies with greater emission reduction effects, such as emissions trading schemes.]{.mark}

The US government would be well advised to implement a federal carbon tax policy because doing so will facilitate future policy implementation. Emissions trading schemes and carbon taxes both use different strategies to price carbon emissions. Carbon taxes rely on changes in fossil fuel-reliant markets to curb emissions [(Omolere 2024)]{.mark}. In contrast, emissions trading schemes give the government direct legislative control over emissions[, according to the article "What is Emissions Trading?" by epa.gov.]{.mark} Many argue that the market-based approach of carbon taxes and their lack of legislative regulation makes their effectiveness less certain than emissions trading schemes, as aforementioned. "What is Emissions Trading" states, "[The cap is intended to incentivize effective pollution control and protect public health and the environment. By establishing emission caps, trading programs ensure that overall emission reduction goals are achieved" ("What is Emissions Trading?").]{.mark} While this is true, the market-based strategy of carbon taxes and its lack of rigid emission caps are part of the reason why carbon taxes should be implemented before emissions trading schemes in the US. As Omolere states, "[Rather than impose rigid regulations or emission limits, a carbon tax provides price signals and lets market dynamics determine the most efficient paths and technologies to reduce emissions across diverse economic sectors. Businesses can build solutions tailored to their operations, innovations, and investment roadmaps" (Omolere 2024). For fossil-fuel reliant communities, imposing a maximum limit on carbon emissions might not only hinder economic growth; it could also reduce the ability of businesses to curb their emission rates because they do not yet possess the technology to alter their emission patterns. While this lack of change in emission rates could also arise during the early stages of a carbon tax, a carbon tax would be less likely to raise political opposition from the businesses subject to the tax because their emissions would not be restricted. As Omolere acknowledges, "Choosing appropriate, adjustable tax levels, matching policy priorities and economic diversity is very complex across emissions-intensive sectors. Cost uncertainty creates opposition, and exemptions degrade efficacy. Calibration requires balancing numerous stakeholders and objectives" (Omolere 2024). The economic hardship businesses may endure under an emissions trading policy, due to strict emission caps, could raise opposition to the policy and government mistrust. As long as the government uses a portion of carbon tax revenue to invest in cleaner energy technologies, the tax will be a necessary step towards rigid subsequent emissions caps. This leaves the question of the percentages of revenue that should be allocated towards various sources. Although a tax and dividend policy would best suit the high income inequality present in the United States, returning most or all of the revenue from the carbon tax to citizens might be unrealistic since the government would be left with little to invest into clean energy technology. Therefore, the government must delineate the appropriate percentage of carbon tax revenue to be doled out to taxpayers and the percentages to be invested in various environmental improvements. This is a particularly difficult decision at the federal level (Omolere 2024). Such a decision will require the US government to monitor nationwide income inequality, the proportion of businesses that lack eco-friendly technological innovations, and the degree to which such businesses contribute to the nation's GDP. After the delicate balance between the welfare of individual citizens, businesses, and the planet has been deliberated on, perhaps the only step the government can take is to adopt a tax with revenue allocations that seem reasonable, observe the policy's economic effects, and adjust the policy from there. If no federal carbon tax policy is created, there is no hope of progress towards cleaner economies and a cleaner nation because, for reasons aforementioned, carbon taxes are necessary to transition to policies that restrict businesses' carbon emissions.]{.mark}

[For any country, including the United States, battling the effects of global warming requires many cohesive solutions. No single policy can possibly curb all emissions, and neither carbon taxes nor emissions trading schemes are exceptions to this. However, a carbon tax possesses key elements that would allow it to financially prepare the US government for policies with more dramatic emission reductions. The use of revenue from carbon taxes is flexible and can be tailored to equitably meet the needs of taxpayers and businesses alike -- by effectively balancing the amount of money returned to taxpayers and the amount invested into technology and resources needed for emissions trading schemes, the notion that carbon taxes are inherently regressive can be disproven. Carbon taxes place no limits on businesses' emissions, which makes such taxes less likely to curb emissions but reduces the chance of political opposition. For these reasons, the United States should implement a federal carbon tax as a temporary policy and then transition to an emissions trading scheme when enough revenue is accrued to take larger steps towards flattening emission rates. As a developed country in the midst of a global climate crisis, the United States has ample opportunity to set an international example of commitment to the welfare of planet Earth, the current generation, and future generations. The implementation of a carbon tax is one of many crucial steps toward this objective.]{.mark}

[[Works cited]{.underline}]{.mark}

Andersson, Julius. "Carbon Tax Regressivity and Income Inequality." *freepolicybriefs.org,* 17 May 2021. [[https://freepolicybriefs.org/2021/05/17/carbon-tax-regressivity/]{.underline}](https://freepolicybriefs.org/2021/05/17/carbon-tax-regressivity/). Accessed 30 Mar. 2025.

> Dimitrova, Monna. "What is the difference between carbon taxes and emissions trading schemes?" *homaio.com,* 16 Apr 2024.[[https://www.homaio.com/post/what-is-the-difference-between-carbon-taxes-and-emissions-trading-schemes]{.underline}](https://www.homaio.com/post/what-is-the-difference-between-carbon-taxes-and-emissions-trading-schemes). Accessed 25 Mar. 2025.
>
> Douenne, Thomas, Adrien Fabre. "​​French attitudes on climate change, carbon taxation and other climate policies." Ecological economics, vol.169, no. 106496, 2020. *ScienceDirect.com,* [[https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921800919310705]{.underline}](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921800919310705). Accessed 24 Mar. 2025.
>
> Douenne, Thomas, Adrian Fabre (2019). "Can We Reconcile French People with the Carbon Tax? Disentangling Beliefs from Preferences." *FAERE Working Paper, 2019.10*, pp.16-42. [[https://faere.fr/pub/WorkingPapers/Douenne_Fabre_FAERE_WP2019.10.pdf]{.underline}](https://faere.fr/pub/WorkingPapers/Douenne_Fabre_FAERE_WP2019.10.pdf). Accessed 24 Mar. 2025.
>
> "Nine Charts About Wealth Inequality in America." *apps.urban.org,* 25 Apr 2024, [[https://apps.urban.org/features/wealth-inequality-charts/]{.underline}](https://apps.urban.org/features/wealth-inequality-charts/). Accessed 1 Apr. 2025.
>
> Omolere, Mitota P. "Explainer: What Is a Carbon Tax, Pros and Cons, and Implementation Around the World." *Earth.org*, 9 Jan. 2024, [[https://earth.org/explainer-what-is-a-carbon-tax-pros-and-cons-and-implementation-around-the-world/]{.underline}](https://earth.org/explainer-what-is-a-carbon-tax-pros-and-cons-and-implementation-around-the-world/). Accessed 24 Mar. 2025.

"What Is Emissions Trading?" *epa.gov,* United States Environmental Protection Agency, 22 Nov. 2024, [[https://www.epa.gov/emissions-trading/what-emissions-trading]{.underline}](https://www.epa.gov/emissions-trading/what-emissions-trading). Accessed 26 Mar. 2025.
